Designing components chapter for book (#2371)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/learn/book/storing-data/designing-components.md

+++
title = "Designing components"
insert_anchor_links = "right"
[extra]
weight = 2
status = 'hidden'
+++

Simply understanding the basic operations of components isn't enough to immediately understand how to
model that elaborate game idea in real, functioning code.
Getting the core data model correct makes it much easier to write and revise flexible, fast and correct code.
In Bevy, this usually means what data goes on which components.

This chapter covers some high-level guidance for what you should consider when designing your components,
and additional tools that are helpful when considering this organization.

## Guidance for structuring components

Over time, the Bevy community has converged on a few standard pieces of advice for how to structure and define component data:

> - Try to keep your components relatively small

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Try to keep your Components relatively small.
```

>   - Common functionality can be handled by putting it on a shared [Required Component], discussed below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Common functionality can be handled by using shared [Required Component]s, discussed further down this page.
```

>   - Small modular systems based on common behavior work well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Using smaller modular systems based on common behavior works better.
```

  - Reducing the amount of data stored improves cache performance and system-parallelism
  - Group properties together within a single component if you need to maintain invariants (such as current life is always less than or equal to max life)
  - Additionally, group properties together within a single component if you need methods that operate across several pieces of data (e.g. computing the distance between two points)

> - Simple methods on components are a good tool for clean, testable code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simple methods on Components are a good tool for clean, testable code.
  - Methods make it easier to understand the actual gameplay logic in your systems, and fix bugs in a single place.
```

  - Logic that is inherent to how the component works (like rolling dice or healing life points) is a great fit
  - Logic that will only be repeated once generally belongs in systems
  - Methods make it easier to understand the actual gameplay logic in your systems, and fix bugs in a single place
- **Marker components** (using unit structs) are incredibly valuable for extending your design
  - It is very common to want to quickly look for "all entities that are a `Tower`", or "all entities that are `Chilled`"
  - Filtering by component presence/absence is (generally) faster and clearer than looping through a list of boolean values
  - Try to model meaningful groups at several levels of abstraction / along multiple axes: e.g. `Unit`, `Ant`, `Combatant`
- Enum components are very expressive, and help reduce bugs

>   - Enums can hold different data in each variant, allowing you to capture information effectively

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Enums can hold different data in each variant, allowing you to capture information effectively.
```

  - If you have a fixed number of options for a value, store it as an enum
- Implementing traits like [`Add`] or [`Display`] can provide useful behavior in an idiomatic way

> - Use [`Deref`] and [`DerefMut`] for tuple structs with a single item ([newtypes])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use [`Deref`] and [`DerefMut`] for tuple structs with a single item ([newtypes]).
```

>   - This allows you to access the internal data with `*my_component` instead of `my_component.0`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - This allows you to access the internal data with `*my_component` instead of `my_component.0`.
```

>   - More importantly, this allows you to call methods that belong to the wrapped type directly on your component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - More importantly, this allows you to call methods that belong to the wrapped type directly on your Component.
```

component, insert a `Life` component as well."

However, we didn't specify in the `require` clause how _much_ `Life` we should give the new entity.
As a result, what it got was `Life::default()`. We can do better by supplying an initializer
expression:

```rust,hide_lines=1
# use bevy::ecs::prelude::*;
#[derive(Component)]
struct Life(u8);

#[derive(Component)]
#[require(Life(10))]
struct Combatant;
```

This means that every `Combatant` will get 10 `Life` by default. But what if we want to give the
combatant a different amount of life? That's OK! You see, the "required" clause only sets a
default. You can override the default by specifically including a `Life` component, either
as part of the initial bundle while spawning, or inserted at a later point.

Alternatively, you can use `=` to assign an initial value to the component:

```rust,hide_lines=1
# use bevy::ecs::prelude::*;
#[derive(Component)]
struct Life(u8);

#[derive(Component)]
#[require(Life = initial_health())]
struct Combatant;
```

The `require` macro is the easiest way to declare required components, but you can also define
the required components programmatically by manually implementing the `Component` trait.

> [Required Component]: ../required-components

Reviewer 2: Broken link

[`Add`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Add.html
[`Display`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/path/struct.Display.html
[`Deref`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Deref.html
[`DerefMut`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.DerefMut.html
[newtypes]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/generics/new_types.html

## Reusable logic for components

You may have heard that, in ECS, components are "just data", and cannot or should not store logic.
Generally this is sound advice: performing logic in systems based on component presence/absence and values
is fast and tends to lead to flexible game design that can create interesting emergent behavior.

But, like all advice, there are limits to its validity.
Being able to perform common or complex operations on data in a consistent way is the basis of a good abstraction.

> Define these operations once, use everywhere, and then when you inevitably want to revise it, you only need to update it once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you define some operation for a Component you can then use it everywhere you use that Component. If you eventually need to revise it, you only need to update it once.
```

There are a number of tools available here, listed in order of increasing complexity.
In most cases, simple traits and methods suffice, but it's helpful to be aware of more powerful tools.

> ### Methods and traits for `Component` types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Methods and Traits for `Component` Types
```

Components are just structs (or enums, or tuple structs)!
Like any Rust type, you can define methods for these types, and implement traits for them.

```rust
#[derive(Component)]
pub struct Life {
  current: u32,
  max: u32,
}

impl Life {
  fn set(&mut self, new: u32) {
    self.current = if new > self.max {
      self.max
    } else {
      new
    }
  }
}

impl Sub<u32> for Life {
  type Output = Life;

>   fn sub(self, rhs: u32) -> Self::Output {

Author: That's not the signature of this trait.

    self.current = self.current.saturating_sub(rhs)
  }
}
```

Keeping fields private can be very useful to ensure that key invariants

> (like the fact that current life must be at most max life) are upheld.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above example, we use this to ensure that the *current* life value cannot exceed the *max* life value.
```

### Storing functions inside of components

> Sometimes, you want to be able to store arbitrarily complex, one-off logic on your components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Occasionally you might want to store arbitrarily complex, one-off logic on your components.
```

> While this will be relatively slow (oof my cache locality) and hard to debug, it can be a lot easier to manage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we ignore the added complexity for debugging and the negative effects on cache locality, it can be a lot easier to manage
```

than wrangling hundreds of marker components when working with UI or script-like behavior.

The core pattern here is to store an owned [trait object](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/types/trait-object.html) inside of your component, usually in a `Box`.

The simplest example of this is to store a `Box<dyn Command>`:

```rust
#[derive(Component)]
struct ClickableProp {
  on_click: Box<dyn Command + Clone>
}

// This is an observer!
// We're listening to picking events here!
fn handle_clickable_props(trigger: On<Pointer<Click>>, query: Query<&ClickableProp>, mut commands: Commands){
  let Ok(clickable_prop) = query.get(trigger.entity()) else {
    return;
  };

  commands.queue(clickable_prop.on_click)
}
```

This can be repeated with other traits: `Event` and `Message` are quite powerful if you want to hook into existing logic.

Storing [one-shot systems](../control-flow/systems.md) can be even more expressive.
See the [callbacks example](TODO, see https://github.com/bevyengine/bevy/pull/23197) for a demonstration of this pattern.

> If you benchmarks show that you need to make this pattern more performant, you can consider swapping to [function pointers](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.fn.html), at the cost of some flexibility (no methods, cannot capture).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your benchmarks show that you need to make this pattern more performant, you can consider swapping to [function pointers](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.fn.html), at the cost of some flexibility (no methods, cannot capture).
```

### Accessing data beyond the component

As your logic grows in complexity, you may find yourself repeatedly needing to access data from multiple entities,
components or even resources simultaneously.
For example, you might find that you need to update a tilemap index while revising tile data,
animate a goblin by mutating both its weapon and the root entity,
or checking if an ability can be used by checking available mana, cooldowns and range to the target.

Duplicating this complex logic can be both error-prone and tedious!

> While this should prompt you to ask "can / should we combine this data into a single component",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your first thought should be to ask "Can we (or even *Should* we) combine this data into a single component",
```

that's not always feasible (sometimes for reasons outside of your control).

We can abstract complex ECS lookups like this by creating our own custom `QueryData`, `QueryFilter`
and `SystemParam` types, using the provided derive macros.

> `QueryData` and `QueryFilter` are useful when the data is in separate components on the same entity and is quite composable (you can always add more terms to your `Query`!),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`QueryData` and `QueryFilter` can be used when the data you want to access is in *multiple separate components* on the *same* entity. They can be quite composable since you can always add more terms to your `Query`!.
```
